---
layout: post
title: Meh
tags: severe-procrastination
year: 2014
month: 10
day: 27
published: true
summary: Do you know of those books that contained blank pages for you to write the story?
---
Saturday. Fourteen hours on planes and in airports. At least I'm heading to a warmer
place. People say it's much better there. Eva smiles and nods at me all the way.

Sunday. I am now more than 10,000 km from everyone I know. I like this new place. It's
very high and sunny. Everything is very spacious.

Monday. There is no Internet access at work. Aren't we what people call an Internet
company? I can't find who's responsible for the Z Server not working.

Tuesday. People look at me inside the car as if i'm threatening. Of course, most people
here don't have a car, or a job, any education, or a way to feed their three kids. The air
is extremely polluted, and I walk around in a mask whenever I can remember to put it on.

Wednesday. Building security told me my supervisor does not exist, and I was denied entry
at work. I called my supervisor, who arrived after two hours, an explained he had to go
oversee his pool being cleaned first. He assured the building security that I could go and
work for the day.

Thursday. I don't remember if there ever was a Thursday in my life.

Friday. In an effort to appear polite, my taxi driver slammed a door on my face. Neither
she nor eleven other people knew what a first aid kit was. Three hours and an ER visit
later, I had to invent an interesting story for my newly acquired Harry Potter scars.

Saturday. Eva is suddenly very angry at me. What are you talking about? Where is my
pillow?

Sunday. I need to clean up my code. I need to find who has the forms I need to submit
tomorrow. Why am I working on a Sunday? Fuck!

Monday. New assignment. New people. More of the same people.

Tuesday. Daniel didn't send the required materials. Nothing else happened.

Wednesday. I won't get off my bed. I texted my boss that I am sick. She said I have to get
a doctor's note to HR if I want to get paid. I would sooner return to grade school.

Thursday. I don't remember if there ever was a Thursday in my life.

Friday. I met Florence, who's very pretty and asked me if I had a girlfriend. I lied. I
didn't tell that to Eva and she's very angry at me.

Saturday. I wanted to set up a little album of our life here so far, but my camera was
stolen. What do I do?

Sunday. Another man was killed near our house. Eva says he was electrocuted by the fence,
but the police explained they shot him.

Monday. Maybe I can't do this job. Maybe 30-year-olds can't do the same things they did 5
years ago. Maybe it's time for a change.

Tuesday. I always thought Eva had been very patient with me. While I was asleep, she
kicked me until she broke a couple of ribs. I can understand her.

Wednesday. Whatever happened to my friends? I wonder if I will ever see them again.

Thursday. Why does the thing I remember most about my day is how you destroyed it, you
asshole?

Friday. Florence has called me more than two dozen times. It's a bit annoying, really. My
dad called to say mom died, 3 weeks or so ago.

Saturday. I've put together a little party, and everyone is kind of jealous at how great
my company is. Why can't those people see how horrible it is? Don't they have a life,
what's wrong with them?

Sunday. I found a roommate to share the huge flat with. He never talks. He never makes a
noise. I like that, it allows me to concentrate on the hard problems at work.

Monday. My flatmate was killed by a guy who broke into the flat while I was at work. I
found him when I returned home, around midnight.

Thursday. I don't really do many things. Sometimes a very nice lady drops by the house and
says hi. I've forgotten her name, and I never ask her because she would get quite upset. I
wonder where I left my laptop.
