---
layout: post
title: Under the skin
tags: movies
year: 2014
month: 08
day: 25
published: true
summary: People will worship anything incomprehensible.
---
Under The Skin.

A movie inspired by Michael Faber's novel of the same name. The premise alone promises a
lot. After all, the novel is a fantastic story, very original, and contains insightful
commentary on our patriarchal society, gender relations, equality, beauty, identity, etc.

Unfortunately, that's where the similarities end.

The movie has been hailed as revolutionary, it has been compared to _Mullholland Drive_,
_Enemy_, _Naked Lunch_, and Glazer has been iconified next to names like Lars Von Trier,
Kubrick, and David Lynch. At the same time, it has been called "a tedious bore", "nothing",
"progressively infuriating", and "Complete and utter garbage. Kubrick would roll over in
his grave" by critics.

Let's get one thing out of the way - the movie's shocking. It is designed to stun the
viewer before even a single frame is shown. We'll get to that later. However, shock value
alone does not a good picture make.

I'm going to start with the soundtrack, which I did not like much. It makes a conscious
but untimely (musically speaking) effort to underline the action, and further shock the
viewer - as if one doesn't already have enough on their plate with the nonexistent dialog
and intentionally incomplete script. The soundtrack does a good job conveying the detached
nature of the Alien (let's call her that) and her _work_. If I may be allowed, I'd also
say it is very Edinburgh, as well. Fitting. At the same time, its minimalism is annoying
and stressful. Intentionally so.

Let's get to the script. Michael Faber's writing - the wonderful parts as well as the
awkward metaphors - is nowhere to be seen, of course. With it, most plot points are also
gone. The movie sticks to the brutal _work_ that the viewer has to accept has to be done -
the perpetrators could be aliens or the NSA, _have fun with it_, one will never be told.
One will never be told of who the motorcycle man is, either, or why he so faithfully
covers up the Alien's tracks and enables all this questionable way of going about
harvesting single males for their..flesh? I suppose. I found Scotland to be a magnificent
choice for the picture; its scenery fits perfectly with the character of the film, dark
and decadent, calm yet bustling. Having read the novel, I can't help but point out the
picture falls short - perhaps a narrator wouldn't work with the kind of film Glazer wanted
this to be, however the trade-off is that he has to skip essential elements into the
social commentary this movie ought (and tries!) to be. Overall, intentional vagueness does
not a good story tell.

The picture left me hanging. On one hand, there is some visually (aesthetically?)
pleasing, stunning and disturbing imagery, all of which plays into the whole charade
that's set up, with all the vague references and _let the reader write the story_ kind of
thing. On the other hand, this intentional need to be abstract and not _in-your-face_
direct about a message (because why would you bother with something obvious) makes it
frustratingly incomprehensible. It must sound like an oxymoron having written what I
already wrote, but I don't think I would have understood this film if I hadn't read the
book first. Also, it seems each scene's duration is intentionally and sufficiently
dilated; I can confirm this is not just boredom I'm talking about, as the film is really
light on content.

The acting, overall, I'd characterise as very convincing. Above all, Scarlett Johansson
proves she has real acting chops, and is not just fit for Marvel's CGI freak shows. It's
probably high time Hollywood stopped focusing the camera on her ass, and tried some other
angles. I found her performance extraordinary, capturing exactly the Alien's character and
its unusual reactions & dilemmas. The movie shows very well the contrast between how
creepy and disturbing the events are, and the beautiful, likeable even, characters.
Ultimately, the whole thing (like, the movie) hinges on the mystery that surrounds it, and
this works out very well for the acting, the actors have really done a great work here.
The others...not so much.

Overall, the hype surrounding this movie makes you think Hell itself will open up and
demons will devour your very reality at the very action of watching it. The creepy and
disturbing feeling of the book is completely lost here. One can certainly comment
positively on the acting and Glazer's ambitious vision, but the end result doesn't
satisfy.
