---
layout: post
title: (No) Mistakes Were Made
tags: [rant]
year: 2015
month: 09
day: 21
published: true
summary: The endowment effect in full force.
---
When developing programs, a logical fallacy that manifests often is to want to continue
pouring your time and resources down a path you've already taken and leads you to misery
and your users to screaming, instead of another path that "everybody else" seems to think
would be better. Change is a little bit scary.

Recently, a 14-year-old kid in Texas was arrested because he brought a clock he assembled
himself to his school. You might have heard about him - his name is Ahmed and (perhaps
not) coincidentally, he's also brown. Refer to all the articles others wrote about the
whole story. Contrary to habit, we're not here today to post facts.

This kid's school knew right away the clock wasn't a bomb. I refuse to believe the
teachers in Texas are this stupid. They knew, but at the same time they were afraid. And
they were mad that a 14-year-old kid, which they were already afraid of because of his
skin and his heritage, made them afraid. From there on, it was a slippery slope:

They almost immediately switched the narrative in their head that it must be a bomb hoax.
Apparently the school principal tried to bully the kid into confessing exactly that, that
he brought the clock to incite fear.

Of course the kid wouldn't confess - because that's not what he did - and instead of
saying "Oh, OK", they escalated by bringing the police in to intimidate him further.

The police interrogated them while denying his parents being present, which is apparently
illegal in the US. They found no reason to charge him with either having a bomb, or
performing some hoax. Around the same time, the principal was sending out this ridiculous
letter / press release to double down on the school's bad choices, and the mayor did the
same supporting everyone _but_ the brown kid.

So what actually happened is something we've all come across as a kid. They were
unreasonably afraid, and couldn't / wouldn't admit it, so they contorted all reason in
order to make their choices seem reasonable, and like they were acting prudently and
reasonably. The assumption being nobody's allowed to admit a mistake, because these are
adults, in charge of other actual people, and they're not allowed to be afraid, especially
of _nothing at all_, because that's a sign of weakness.

We've all done this. We said a white lie, and then doubled down upon it, and with every
additional lie the whole story gets so ludicrous but the cost of saying "I'm lying this
whole time" seems so big, that telling another lie seems like the only way out. And
anyway, we can forgive lying kids. But not people in charge of taking care of kids.

PS. In case it's not obvious, there's nothing to forgive if one's afraid.
