---
layout: post
title: <++>
tags: systemd
year: 2017
month: 02
day: 14
published: false
summary: <++>
---

Today I'll be starting a new series of posts, centered around systemd. Fair warning: if
you think you're tired of the constant yelling back and forth in various blogs, and the
generic uninformed nonsense on Hacker News about systemd, I have two things to say:

+ I am going to offer you technical arguments based on solid, tested facts on a real
  system (with peculiar boot requirements)
+ I am only minimally going to refrain from yelling, because my frustration with systemd
  is big
+ At the very least, I will point out where I am still uninformed about systemd matters

So, you're still here. Alright, then, what's this about?

The series concerns a rather large embedded system. Even if it's "embedded", it involves
quite able hardware. Think of it as your generic 2015 desktop PC, add a touchscreen or two
to it, all sorts of networking interfaces (wifi, BT, LTE, Ethernet), and both solid-state
and spinning storage. It is based on the Linux kernel and userspace, it is the result of
hundreds of (real) engineers, it is in production, and it involves some peculiar
general requirements:

- Parts of the system **must** be available to its user _2 seconds_ after power-on. Say
  you push a power-on switch, and 2 seconds later there must be something displayed on one
  of the touchscreens. Kinda like that.
- Quality. Actual quality, as in cheap to maintain infrastructure, testable behaviour,
  minimal cruft to the extent in which it is possible, safe and sane defaults, predictable
  behaviour and exceptional reliability.
- …


Before we go on to examine specifics, let me give you some more background. I've worked
with this system for 5 months now. The choice of systemd as an init system was made "for
us" by a supplier and we have no insight into that decision-making process, but we will
examine what parts of the system were affected by this decision, and more importantly,
how. Our current approach is strictly guided by tangible, measurable KPIs, some of which
are performance-oriented (see above). It's m
